[THEME MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>I expect to find in
Peru the answers to some
of the many enigmas of the
megalithic engineering that's
found in the Andes Mountains.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>What has really struck
me about the sites in Peru
at Tiahuanaco, Machu Picchu,
is the enormous stonework
that the ancients
actually created.
I've been fascinated with it.
I'm absolutely enamored
with Machu Picchu.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>On previous trips
to Peru, I have
seen what are amazing enigmas
with giant megalithic blocks
perfectly cut and articulated.
What seems to be
high-tech engineering far
beyond what the ancient
Incas were capable of doing.
>>There's multiple
aspects involved here.
Step one is how do you cut this
stuff thousands of years ago?
How and with what?
And then once you get it
cut, for whatever reason
they've got precise corner
breaks and fillet radiuses
down lengths that
are unexplained.
But they obviously had
something to inspect
these characteristics to assure
things were parallel, to assure
they were perpendicular.
And that goes out into
another branch that, you know,
just gets people thinking.
[JET LINER PASSING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
>>As we go around
and we see places,
you know, we'll be
advancing the theory
that Incas didn't
build these walls,
and that they were already
here in Inca times.
Incas lived in these buildings,
but they didn't build them.
They were already standing here.
This is the most
famous stone in Cusco.
It's the stone of the 12 angles.
It's a stone that appears
on the Cusco beer.
And to a lot of people, this
is, like, the symbol of Cusco.
This stone particularly.
[GUITAR AND FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the famous street
in Cusco, [INAUDIBLE].
It goes down to the
Coricancha, The Sun Temple
of the Incas, which is
now a Catholic church.
You'll see here what is called
Royal Inca Architecture.
Just as today Spanish are
living inside these buildings,
but they didn't build
them, it may well
be that the Incas also, though
they lived in these buildings,
didn't build them.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This wall here is interesting
because it shows how the stone
masons liked to have fun.
You have level rows of very
perfectly fitting blocks,
and then you get
to this stone where
they've decided to join the
blocks diagonally this way.
And it's kind of a unique
block in this whole wall
right here, which is
actually still quite stable
and has been through
quite a few earthquakes.
It's interesting to always look
at some of the different walls
that you see around Cusco.
This one has some of the
so-called Primitive Inca
Construction.
And then we see other
large blocks put
in here of certain patchwork.
Kind of curious
reconstruction of this wall.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
And one of the questions that,
you know, you have to ask
is why would anybody go
to such extreme effort
to build with such giant stones?
It's not necessary, when
they could be building
with much smaller stones.
But here they're building
with giant stones, and it's--
>>Well, they didn't have to put
in as much effort as we would.
That's why.
>>I think that's it.
Yeah, and so the reason
why they are building
with such giant stones is
because it was easy for them,
not because it was hard.
>>Yeah.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is a particularly
unique rock here,
and many people
think that it has
to do with the Kundalini
Serpent Energy that's
taught in ancient India and
that this whole figure here
is of a snake.
And we see pictures of snakes
carved in the stones in Cusco.
This one is
particularly unusual,
because it's very deep and
large carved into this granite.
And then you have one, two,
three, four, five, six,
seven chakras.
It's thought that this
corresponds to the Kundalini
Energy in your spine, going
up through your chakras here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
What we find right here at
the seat of the Inca here
at Sacsaywaman is that this
seat right here is magnetized.
And by bringing our compass
along this stones right here,
the compass is spinning.
So there's a curious
magnetic anomaly right here.
Some strong magnetic field.
It's either naturally
in the rock,
or has somehow been
artificially placed here.
It's possible that this
magnetic field actually
has something to do with the
moving of these giant stones.
We're looking at a processes
or machine tools, or tool bits
anyway, that's common to the
builders of this facility,
for want of a better word,
the builders of this site,
and what they were
doing in Egypt.
>>Supposed that the
Incas are building this,
you know, 1300 AD, 1400 AD,
even right up to, you know,
Spanish conquest
was really 1532.
So, I mean, you now, at
14-- they're saying, like,
a hundred years before
the Spanish got here, 1430
or something, you know, they're
building all this stuff.
It's crazy.
You know, but this is what--
when we go to
Ollantaytambo, you'll
see it's even more ridiculous.
That's-- on that site, that's
where you can totally prove
that it's just ridiculous
what they're saying.
But right over here is
the Inca slide and stuff.
We'll see more of these
weird smoothed rocks here.
And then, yeah, they've carved
little notches on it and stuff.
I mean, it's bizarre.
If this was actually carved by
a glacier that was smoothing it
out, you have to
wonder why you're going
to have these rough parts here.
If there had been a glacier
actually carving this,
it would have smoothed
out this entire stone
and you wouldn't have these
rough knobs like this.
You just wouldn't
really have that.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[CHILDREN LAUGHING]
Look at this curious
stone and how it
has a channel going through it.
It's almost as if
at one point there
was, like, aqueduct
kind of thing here,
and that this big stone
is all that's left.
But maybe water was being
channeled down and then
through here, and then would
have come out this area.
You know, why would there just
be a solitary stone like this?
There must have been other
blocks fitted up against it.
And here you can see
how the thing's here.
>>Water channel.
Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Now, this block here
is curious with its,
again, precision corners.
And then these,
like, scoops out.
Now, it's theorized,
you know, by some people
that these scoops were used
in the construction of, like,
ramming poles and stuff
in here to hold up
blocks while they're, you know,
carefully chiselling them out.
Yet, not all the
blocks have that.
Only some.
And others, rather than having
scoops, have knobs instead.
Like there you can see a
couple of knob up there.
The theory is that these scoops
and knobs were somehow used
in the handling of the blocks.
But, again, exactly how
they would have done it,
it's a mystery.
I mean, it's thought that
it was just brute force.
One of the strange things,
too, with blocks like this
is that in the traditional
idea that they're constantly
chiseling away to
make it perfect,
but that meant moving the
blocks away, chiseling
it a little bit, putting
it back, seeing how it fit,
moving it again, chipping
it more, putting it back.
And this constant
trial and error
of trying to get the
blocks to fit right.
I mean, it's really one
of the great mysteries
of how they were such
incredible stonemasons that they
would just make all of
the blocks fit perfectly.
And it was definitely
part of their technique
that this perfect fitting
was very much their style,
and they just weren't going
to do it any other way.
We're here at the top of
Sacsaywaman above Cusco,
and this is the area where there
used to be several tall towers.
We only can see the bases
of these towers now.
They were destroyed
by the Spanish.
But it's kind of
interesting that
originally here at
Sacsaywaman there
were two very tall towers.
We'll also find a tower
like these at Machu Picchu.
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
So here at Kenko, we
have this curious carving
of this granite hill carved
into steps and notches.
It almost makes no sense.
It would seem as
if it was, like,
a practice area for
the stone masons
to come and practice their
techniques of carving and stone
masonry.
It was one of the stories
too about Sacsaywaman
is that there are tunnels going
all down through Sacsaywaman
that'd been closed
up by the Spanish.
But according to the
legends, the Incas
hid this treasure from
the Sun Temple in Cusco
down inside this labyrinth
of tunnels that goes deep
under Sacsaywaman and Cusco.
These tunnels, too, are
carved out of a solid rock.
They have different passageways
going off to the side.
You've got stories
as well of people
who've gone into these tunnels
and disappeared for weeks.
And when they
finally appear, they
had gold, peanuts and corn
stocks made out of gold,
and other treasures that came
out of the Coricancha The Sun
Temple in Cusco.
Here at Kenko, the
blocks are all carved,
and steps are carved,
into solid rock.
There's areas for rivulets to
go down for blood or water.
It's thought that llamas,
alpacas, were sacrificed here,
and then the blood allowed to
flow down along the stones.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
[WATER FALLING]
This was the main road
going to the Sacred Valley.
So as you were going
to the Sacred Valley,
you would stop
here at Tambomachay
and then go on up this Inca
road here up over the mountains.
And then you would come back
down into the Sacred Valley
to the towns of Pisac,
Urubamba, Calca, Ollantaytambo.
[WATER FALLING]
[DRUMS]
This gigantic block of
granite, probably weighing
several hundred tons,
came from the quarry high
above Ollantaytambo
and across the river.
It was squared, it was
moved quite the distance
towards the ruins, which
are now just up here,
but for some reason
this gigantic block
never made it to The Sun
Temple at Ollantaytambo.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Behind me is the town
of Ollantaytambo.
And up this direction is
the massive Sun Temple.
In Inca times, there were
only three megalithic cities
that were inhabited
during Inca times
and are still inhabited today.
Cusco's one of them.
Another town is
called Chinchero.
And the third is this
town of Ollantaytambo.
People are still living
in the ancient buildings,
as they did in Inca times.
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
This is one of the
giant andesite blocks
that comes from the top of
The Sun Temple up there.
It's been quarried.
It's got even some
drill holes here.
It probably has fallen
down from the top
in the cataclysm that
destroyed The Sun
Temple in ancient times.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is part of the
ramp that goes up
the west side of The Sun
Temple of Ollantaytambo
where they apparently
dragged these massive stones.
The lazy stones that never
made it up to the temple
that we just looked at are
back down behind me over there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the very top of
the main wall of The Sun
Temple of Ollantaytambo.
You can see how the
narrow slivers of granite
and the big blocks are perfectly
fitted together up on top.
There's a corresponding
wall here.
Yet we know that this is
only some small portion
of the gigantic building
that was originally here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
These giant blocks
of red granite
are exactly as they
were in Spanish times,
and in Inca times as well.
None of these
blocks has probably
moved an inch for hundreds,
if not thousands, of years.
We see giant squared blocks
of red andesite here.
We see other blocks
of red andesite there.
This one probably weighing
several hundred tons.
But then we see this
poor construction here.
We see more of this
We see this stone has
been notched right here
for another giant block.
It's quite clear to me really
that this is Inca construction
here, while these giant
blocks on either side
are the megalithic pre-Inca
construction that we're
looking for.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the main wall of The
Sun Temple at Ollantaytambo.
It consists of six
giant slabs of andesite.
And between them are these
thin slivers of granite.
You see here these giant knobs?
Like this one?
Other curious knobs.
And then here we have
part of an Andean cross
on this side of this slab.
We also see here these knobs.
More of these thin
slivers of granite.
Other knobs here.
Some have been chipped away.
And then we come here to the
edge of this massive wall,
and we have this curious
stone lying here.
It appears to have been a
lintel of a huge doorway that's
fallen straight down.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
These giant blocks of
red andesite granite
didn't come from this
site here that we're at.
In fact, they came
from this mountain
on the other side of the
river that's many miles away.
The quarry on this
mountain up here
is massive blocks
of granite that
have come down from
the mountain almost
like they have been blasted
off of this granite mountain.
Many of them are squared
higher up in the mountain,
and then brought by trails
down for many miles.
And then they have
to cross the river,
then come back up
this mountain here
at The Sun Temple
of Ollantaytambo,
and then are put into place.
This is an engineering
feat that is perhaps
unequaled in mankind--
bringing massive blocks
of granite many miles
and across a river,
up another mountain,
and then perfectly placed
where we see them today.
It's almost a superhuman effort.
This block is
particularly interesting
because it has what we
call keystone cuts on it.
Keystone cuts are these
T-shaped cuts in the stone.
And then another stone
is fitted against this
with a corresponding
T-shaped cut.
And then a copper clamp,
or some other metal,
is poured into these
grooves forming
what's called a keystone cut.
We find these unusual
keystone cuts also
at Tiahuanaco in Bolivia, which
is an, admittedly, pre-Inca
building.
We also find keystone cuts
like this in ancient Egypt,
in ancient Turkey,
in ancient Greece,
and in other parts of the world.
>>But when you're talking
about a later culture
coming in and working
with these blocks,
that's the technology they had.
Very, very small elements.
Easy to handle.
I mean, you see it today.
That's how they
build their houses.
>>That's right.
So, I mean, that's
part of the point
here is that someone
was able to build
with giant blocks of stone.
>>Oh, yeah, very easily.
>>Yeah, and it
wasn't hard for them.
>>No.
>>But that probably wasn't
the Incas doing that.
>>Well, if this is Inca-- again,
if the lower part is Inca,
then this isn't.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This giant block
of andesite appears
to have been standing
up and was pushed over
onto this platform
that was made for it.
Here we see slabs that
are still in place.
They're weighing
hundreds of tons.
Perfectly fitted together.
Joints are perfect.
They have this
curious raised bit
of stone here in
the central part.
More knobs here.
And more fitting here.
But what this wall
was originally
we really have no idea.
Here again we have one of
the unusual keystone cuts
that's been cut into this block.
And of course, naturally,
another giant block
would have been
fitted against it
with a corresponding
keystone cut on this side.
The Incas were really
not known for building
with keystone cuts.
This is something that
instead we find at Tiahuanaco.
This wall right here at The
Sun Temple of Ollantaytambo
is actually extremely important.
You see these quite large
blocks of andesite here.
You see the poor construction
of filler right here.
This is the Inca construction.
But most importantly, we
see this keystone cut here
on this block.
We only have one half
of a keystone cut.
And this is extremely
important, because there's
no way that the original
builders of this wall
would ever have cut
a keystone cut here
and not have another
wall attached
to it with a corresponding
keystone cut.
And in fact, this block had
to have originally have been
horizontal, because a
keystone cut cannot be poured
on a vertical block like this.
It's absolutely clear to
me that this wall itself
has been destroyed
and reconstructed, all
in prehistory
before the Spanish.
Probably, the builders who
reconstructed this wall
were even pre-Inca themselves.
And later, the Incas
came in and filled
in with this mud, mortar
construction we see here.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
Yeah, this wall right here is
one of the most perfect walls.
It's very famous here
at Ollantaytambo.
It has a lot of the
polygonal jigsaw cutting
and fitting of the blocks.
One of the reasons
for this is it
provides more surface area for
the blocks to lock in together
and creates a great
deal more stability
for these gigantic walls.
You have to wonder, too,
why they wanted this.
They clearly, as they
built such walls like this,
this was important
to them that they
had these little
notches and corners that
were fitting in together.
It was to keep them
from being uniform,
and by providing
extra surface area,
the blocks held
together better during
the many Andean earthquakes
that are so severe.
This great doorway here
is also quite interesting.
It's built out of quite
large blocks of granite
weighing many tens of tons.
And then here you
see the articulation
of the blocks coming in,
very uniform, coming down
to the corners.
This is extremely
fine construction.
Some of the finest
construction ever in the world.
These fine granite blocks
here at Ollantaytambo
are also curious
for this corner here
where the blocks have actually
been carved around this corner,
and then notched and
fitted here perfectly.
This is quite
curious construction,
and something we also see
in Egypt at the Valley
Temple of Khafre
and at the Osirian
and other areas of Egypt that
are thought to be pre-Inca.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
>>OK, this stone right here,
while it does not actually
display the extreme
precision that we
find on the stones
in Egypt, it's
still a considerable amount
of work to create this.
It's fairly flat
along the surface,
and they went to a considerable
amount of time and work
putting this notch in.
For what reason?
That's a mystery.
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
We checked the corner radius on
that other block, and I also--
we find the same condition or
the same radius in this one.
And again, the thing
to really point out
is that these were used
for construction purposes.
The kind of precision
that we find in Egypt,
they must have had a
much higher purpose,
a technological purpose.
And even though we may say,
OK, for water management
or hydraulic management, that
is a technological purpose.
And these blocks may
have had some function
in a hydraulic device.
The precision-- you don't
need that kind of precision
for hydraulics.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I get the impression
that we have
a lot of anomalous carving
on the face of the mountain.
Do you see these niches
cut into the mountain?
For what reason?
I don't know.
But if you take it
into consideration
with what we find
in Egypt where there
was an advanced
acoustic technology,
it's almost like they were
carving the mountain out
to tune it to
particular frequencies.
And perhaps these
were acoustic horns
that were left in
the face of the rock.
But for what?
What reason would they
have to do this work?
[CHILDREN CHANTING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, to get a corner
radius like this,
you would have to use a tool has
a dimension of 5/8 of an inch,
because what we have
is a 5/16s radius.
So typically, if you
were working with stone
to create these artifacts,
the work that it would take
to actually go from a larger
radius, which obviously you
would have to use a
larger tool to start with
and then come down to
this smaller radius,
there would have to be some
significant purpose in order
to do that because the amount
of work involved is tremendous.
And that's not to say that
they couldn't have done it,
but I have my doubts.
I mean, the volume of work that
we see around here certainly
indicates that they had
a very efficient way
of performing this work.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[RUSHING WATER]
>>We're on the trail going
up to the megalithic quarry
high above Ollantaytambo where
the big blocks of granite are.
This is our guide, Mario.
Speaks pretty good English and,
of course, fluent in Quechua.
He's from the village
of Ollantaytambo,
and he's studying to
be a tourist guide.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
According to Mario, this is
one of the tired stones, one
of the stones coming
from the quarry
up on the mountain
that was supposed
to go down to the
river and then up
the other side to The Sun
Temple at Ollantaytambo.
For some reason, this
one didn't make it.
It's one of the smaller
stones, actually,
but it still weighs many tons.
So you have to wonder
why would the Incas,
or even the pre-Inca,
a stonemasons,
want to come up here
on top of this mountain
and then quarry these
hundred-ton, 200-ton, 500-ton
blocks of granite, and then
with some superhuman effort just
drag them miles down this
mountain across a river
and then up the mountain on the
other side to The Sun Temple?
I mean, it makes
you think, could it
have been actually easy
for them to do this rather
than so incredibly difficult,
as it would appear?
So this giant block of
granite here in the quarry
has already been
partially split open.
They're trying to separate
this part of the rock.
This giant block right here has
also been cut or chipped away
and moved.
Here you see the splitting
of the rock here.
Just part of the
quarrying process.
Here are several
very large pieces
of granite that have
been quarried here.
They've obviously been squared
into big long rectangles.
They're probably
weighing 10 or 15 tons.
For some reason, the stonemasons
never moved these rocks down
to the bottom.
We've walked over four hours
up here to this giant granite
quarry.
Here's another one of the stones
that's been roughly squared,
ready to be moved.
You just have to wonder
why would they go
through such difficult process?
What motivated them to move
such giant blocks of stone?
They could have
easily have built
with much smaller blocks that
would have been much more
easy to move.
But as we've seen,
they wanted to build
with giant megalithic blocks.
According to many
archaeologists,
the Incas didn't
know about the wheel
and they didn't have writing.
But here we find actually
a giant stone wheel
with a hole in the middle.
What was it used for?
Was it actually part of
moving the giant blocks?
One of the mysteries
here at the quarry.
This is one of the
giant blocks of granite
that's been hewn
here at the quarry.
This one weighs many
hundreds of tons.
And in fact, we can
see a saw mark here
where the stonemasons
were beginning to cut
pieces of this block away.
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
Through this
megalithic doorway lies
the lost city of Machu Picchu.
It's a secret city, built
high on top of a mountain.
It's a megalithic city.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
According to many
archaeologists,
Machu Picchu was built
only a few hundred years
before the Spanish conquest.
But there is evidence that Machu
Picchu was a pre-Inca city.
Let's go look for the evidence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here at Machu
Picchu, Chris and I
will be looking for
precision engineering.
Much of the city is
really not precise
engineering or construction.
But there are certain
parts of Machu Picchu that
are especially interesting.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Machu Picchu is high up on a
mountain above the Urubamba
River.
It's a megalithic city.
It's a secret city.
It's the lost city of the Incas.
Here's some of the quarry
here at Machu Picchu.
The Incas, or whoever
constructed Machu Picchu,
had a ready supply
of granite blocks
right up here on the mountain.
They left many of them in
place, but others were no doubt
quarried and cut right here
and then moved into place
where we see them today.
These parts of Machu Picchu are
very similar to Ollantaytambo
and other areas that
we've identified
as pre-Inca construction.
The walls are megalithic.
They're perfectly
fitted together.
The blocks of stone are 10,
20, 30, 50 tons a piece.
Here we actually see this
wall's being pulled apart
by earthquakes.
Yeah, and this is the
famous Room of Three Windows
right here.
It's megalithic.
It's perfectly fitted together.
It's the kind of
construction we see
at the Valley Temple
of Khafre in Egypt,
similar to what's at Abydos.
It's also very similar to
what we saw in Ollantaytambo.
Let's look at this wall here.
Again, another
megalithic granite block.
These smaller blocks are
still perfectly fitted.
And as you go higher
to each tier here,
the method of construction
doesn't change.
It's clear that the same
engineer and stonemasons
have made this entire wall.
There's nothing inferior
about any part of it.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Yeah, here we have bedrock,
living rock, massive piece
of granite.
And now we have quarried stone
perfectly fitted in with it.
And it's, you know, this
tremendous perfect kind
of construction
that we want to see
and which is really indicative
of the ancient builders
and the pre-Inca builders
that we're talking about.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I mean, even just the lichen
patches on these rocks
is indicative of great age.
And the lichen patches
are on the inside,
meaning this wall
has been pulled apart
by earthquakes for a long time.
In fact, I would
say that, I mean,
this wall that's pulling
apart here, I mean,
this has been going
on for thousands
of years, not a few hundred.
And in fact, no doubt
even at the time
of the Spanish conquest or
at the time of the Incas,
this wall already
looked like this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here's one of the
perfectly-made megalithic walls
here at Machu Picchu.
Notice again, the notching,
some of the knobs,
the perfectly-cut blocks,
perfectly fitted together.
You can't even get a
piece of paper in here.
It's really precise
construction.
Very large lichen patches.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here are also
these small niches.
Huge granite ashlars
here as a base.
Very fine construction.
Look at this corner down here
with a very precise-cut corner
locking these stones together.
Quite unusual.
There's a lot of
neat stuff in here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Yeah, this is the highest
part of Sacsaywaman here.
That's part of The
Hitching Post of the Sun.
Here they would, at the
summer solstice and stuff,
they would hitch
the sun and draw it.
Part of it was broken
a couple of years ago.
But this is the highest part
of Machu Picchu right here.
And this giant block of
granite, which was probably
carved right in situ
from bedrock, actually,
was thought to be the most
important spot at Machu Picchu.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Look at this top of
this wall right up here
how it appears to
be like a zigzag.
It's also locked in together.
>>Yeah, yeah.
It's interlocked, yeah.
>>Interlocked.
>>That's fascinating.
>>I mean, that's
a pretty curious--
>>Yeah.
>>--construction technique,
wouldn't you say?
>>Well, I mean, it's--
they're building the tops
of the blocks the same way
they are the faces.
>>The faces.
In the jigsaw, polygonal thing.
Yeah.
>>Increasing the surface
contact between the blocks.
>>OK, right.
The surface contact
between the blocks
is increased, so that makes
them more secure and--
>>Correct.
>>OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But this is a
particularly unusual room.
You know, I always stop
and talk about this.
This giant block
right here, I mean,
that is weighing hundreds
of tons right there.
It's got the giant knobs
down at the bottom.
It would have originally been
perfectly fitted right there,
but now earthquake
and settling is
pulling this whole
megalithic wall apart.
The idea that there's different
levels of construction
here is what I'm saying.
Some archaeologists
actually believe
that the Incas never really
knew about Machu Picchu either,
and that everything in
Machu Picchu is pre-Inca.
>>Ah, OK.
Well, there's certainly
two different styles
of construction here.
That's for sure.
>>OK, and that's what I've
wanted to show you is that,
yeah, there's definitely
a pre-Inca, megalithic,
perfect-fitting type
construction and then a later
construction that's--
>>Yeah.
>>--you know, much poorer
in construction, really.
In my mind, this door is a good
example of different levels
of construction.
Here you see an earlier level
of megalithic construction.
But though it's not so perfect
as some of the other things.
>>No, it's not as thick as
what we were looking at.
>>That's right.
So maybe this is
then the second level
of megalithic construction.
>>[INAUDIBLE]
>>Right.
But it's still a pretty
good construction,
and using big stones.
But once you get
up to this level
here and right above
the door, you're
into some pretty crummy
poor construction.
I mean, this is really your
Inca construction up here.
And this is you're
pre-Inca construction.
>>Yeah, because they're didn't
even pretend to get that flat.
You know, I mean, you can
tell just by looking at it,
it's just not flat.
I won't even put a straight edge
on that because it's obvious.
>>Uh-huh.
OK.
Yeah, right.
But it's still pretty
good construction,
and it's megalithic, really.
>>Yeah.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's one of the
mysteries of Machu Picchu
is why they built this
megalithic city high up
in the Andes here.
In many ways, it's like a
control city for the Urubamba
and the lower jungle.
Any tribes coming up from the
lower jungle of the Amazon
would have to pass through the
loop of the Urubamba and Machu
Picchu here.
It's like a secret city,
but also like a guard post
to the upper highlands
in the Sacred Valley.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Machu Picchu was
first discovered
by the Yale historian
Hiram Bingham in 1911.
He was moving down
the Urubamba River
looking for the final capitol
of the Incas called Vilcabamba.
He asked same locals if they
knew where there was a lost
city in the vicinity,
and by paying one $0.50,
he was able to
find Machu Picchu.
And he was suddenly pointed
up, and a guy took him here
to the top of Machu
Picchu where he discovered
these fabulous ruins, which are
today the most popular tourist
spot in all of South America.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Well, the Incas were
excellent road builders.
It is pretty much
an established fact
that many, if not most, of the
roads in Western South America
were actually pre-Inca.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Incas used their many roads
throughout the Inca Empire
to pass messages.
And these messages were
in the form of quipus,
knotted ropes with
different colors
and different kinds of
knots and different numbers
of knots in a string.
These quipus held coded
messages that only the royal
Incas themselves could read.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're here at the end
of The Butterfly Trail
that goes to the Inca bridge
just above Machu Picchu.
Right here the trail ends
with this Inca bridge
with wooden planks
across it on this cliff.
Those wooden planks could
be moved so that people
couldn't cross that bridge.
But then imagine this, the
trail then, in ancient times,
went up here, and then
along this green park
on these sheer granite cliffs,
incredibly, in ancient times,
there was actually a trail there
that was allowing Inca runners
to pass along here.
There must have been, in
fact, some kind of structure
coming out.
It could have just
been wooden beams
sticking out from the wall.
There would be holes there
in the granite cliff.
And then another trail
of wood and flat stones
laid across so that
runners and llamas
could move across this area.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the entrance to the
megalithic city of Pisac.
It's also in the Sacred
Valley, like Ollantaytambo.
Many archaeologists think that
it too was built by the Incas,
although we may find
evidence that it is also
a pre-Inca city.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
We're climbing up to the
highest part of Pisac,
and in fact, part of
the trail makes us
go through this ancient tunnel.
It's quite impressive,
really, and goes all the way
through this rock face.
It may have been
built by the Incas,
or it may actually be pre-Inca.
All right, let's go through it.
Yeah, you start
coming through here.
I mean, this is all
a man-made tunnel.
And it gets pretty
good inside here.
I mean, the walls are rough.
This could have easily
been made by the Incas,
although it's a pretty
impressive bit of engineering.
And, well, it must have been
quite a bit of effort just
to cut through all this
rock so that you can
make the trail go through here.
It's possible that this
was some kind of aqueduct
also in the past.
Quite impressive.
We're right at the beginning of
the Sacred Valley of the Incas.
Pisac is here at one end,
and then Ollantaytambo
is at the far end of
the Sacred Valley.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Yeah, there's an amazing
little trail here.
The drop-off his
virtually sheer.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So here's a City of Pisac.
We've come through a tunnel,
along various cliffs,
and now we're at this
hill top City of Pisac.
Pisac is similar to
Machu Picchu in that it's
on top of a mountain
looking out, in this case,
over the Sacred
Valley of the Incas.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now, if you'll look at the
buildings in this royal section
of Pisac, you'll notice
that the stonework
is very good stonework.
But then we have
this one building
that is here kind of in the
middle which is obviously
of inferior stonework.
Now, mainstream
archaeologists are
saying that this inferior
building is the oldest
building within this complex.
And, naturally then, the fine
stonework building came later.
But what I'm saying is
exactly the opposite.
That building with
the inferior stonework
is clearly the latest
building in this complex.
It was built by the Incas,
while the other finer
stonework is much older.
And is, in fact, pre-Inca.
Let's go down now and
look at the evidence.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The walls here at Pisac
are extremely well-made.
Notice the large lichen
patches that we see.
Much of the buildings have
apparently been dismantled,
possibly even in pre-Inca times.
These wells here are also
extremely well-made, fitted
together.
Notice the rounded corners here.
Kind of like Sacsaywaman.
Other large lichen
patches on these blocks.
Large lichen patches
on the inside
blocks here too,
indicating they've been
dismantled for quite a while.
So when you look at
this building here,
you can clearly see that it's
of inferior stone masonry.
Most archaeologists
today are saying
that this is the oldest
building at Pisac
and was built before the
fine megalithic stones what
we see here.
In my mind, this
theory is wrong.
In fact, I think that
this building here
with the inferior stonework
is the latest building here
at Pisac, and it was
probably built by the Incas.
These structures here
with the megalithic walls
and the perfect stonework,
they're actually pre-Inca,
and they are the oldest
structures here at Pisac.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
This gate is on the
trail just below Pisac.
This wall's also made
of finely-fitted blocks.
Appears to be pre-Inca, in fact.
Here we see Inca
construction over here.
This very large granite
block, it's probably
weighing 20 or 30
tons, apparently
was a lintel above this wall.
But this has all been dismantled
many hundreds of years ago.
And it's quite possible
that even in Inca times
this gate looked
exactly like this.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're here at the
chullpas of Sillustani
just a few kilometers from
the shore of Lake Titicaca.
This is a known pre-Inca site
with these unusual megalithic
towers.
Much of it has been destroyed.
The megalithic blocks
tumbled down all around me.
There's quite a
mystery at this site.
Archaeologists
believe that they were
towers for burying the dead.
Their actual purpose
remains a mystery.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Yeah, notice how the walls
are leaning out on this tower.
>>Well, they lean out
on all the towers, which
is the most curious part of it
is that all these towers seem
to be flared towards the
top and then curl in.
And, you know, traditionally
for stability and construction,
you would not have
a wall leaning out.
So there had to be some unique
reason why they did that.
>>OK, I see what you mean.
Yeah, I never thought
of that before.
But, yeah, for them to
build going out like that,
they wanted that.
And so why would they
want that then to be--
would it be like these
were some acoustic things
and they wanted a certain sound
to come out of these towers?
>>That would be something
to ponder I would think.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>This is one of the
unusual square towers
or chullpas here at Sillustani.
It's been torn apart.
These are massive blocks here
weighing hundreds of tons
probably, in some cases.
And behind it we see
actually what was apparently
an Inca-type tower
that was built
on the inside of this already
destroyed square structure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>Now look at the size of
these blocks right here.
I mean, this is a
tremendous, tremendous feat
of engineering and lifting.
And where they brought them
from, that's another question.
But the size of this one alone.
It must weigh over
a hundred tons.
It's just incredible work.
Incredible work.
No machine precision, again, but
definitely a tremendous feat,
which obviously was lost.
Obviously.
>>Behind me is one of
the towers at Sillustani.
This one is pretty
much as it probably
looked in ancient times.
It came up, flaring outward,
had a band near the top,
and then it curved at the top.
This megalithic tower is
mysterious to archaeologists.
Some think that it was
used as a burial tower.
Others think that it
was an acoustic machine
and that wind blowing across
the tops of these towers
created a constant
whistling sound,
much like the Andean
flutes or pan pipes.
This rather unique stone
circle here at Sillustani near
to Lake Titicaca
was probably used
for archaeoastronomical nominal
purposes, such as marking
the equinox and the solstice.
In many ways, this is very much
like Stonehenge in England.
Used for at least very
much the same purpose.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
So this is the door of Aramu
Muru, sometimes called The Star
Gate or The Devil's Door.
It's carved into solid sandstone
here in one of these odd rock
formations right along the
western shore of Lake Titicaca.
You've got this inner door here.
It's just about six feet tall.
Then you've got the greater
outer door up there.
Looks like it's
about 24 feet high.
This is most probably pre-Inca.
May have been carved many
thousands of years ago.
The lichen patches
right here are huge.
That's usually indicative
of quite a great age.
What the purpose of
this structure is we
don't really know.
You have to wonder
whether at some time
other walls were somehow
connected to this.
It's possible that giant
stone blocks were interlocked
into this giant door.
But we really don't know.
One of the interesting
things about this door,
too, is that it's
essentially a false door,
a door going nowhere.
This is something that we
also see in ancient Egypt
where the Egyptians were
known to build false doors,
put them in tombs
around the Giza Plateau
in the Valley of the Kings,
other places in Egypt,
we see these false doors.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
OK, interesting.
What Jose is saying is
that the different legends
are one is that
this is a star gate,
a gate to other dimensions.
And by projecting your
mind through this door,
you can enter
different dimensions.
Another legendary
that he's saying
is that this is
the devil's door,
and that through this door
you go to the devil's church.
And that this is, of
course, a bad thing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We're standing on the western
side of Lake Titicaca.
Right out there is the
famous Island of the Sun,
and to the right of it is
the Island of the Moon.
According to
ancient Inca legend,
this is where the
first Incas appeared.
The first King, Manco Capac,
and his wife, Mama Ocllo,
and also other brothers
and sisters of them,
they magically appeared
on the Island of the Sun,
allegedly coming through
tunnels underneath the lake.
And in fact, legend
says that there
was a tunnel beneath
the lake that
connects the Island of the Sun
and the Island of the Moon.
So after being Incas
had first appeared
on the Island of the Sun
and the Island of the Moon,
they then came ashore
here on Lake Titicaca
to tell the people
who lived around
here the Aymaras, the Coyas, the
Wari, that they had been sent
from the Sun God to civilize
them, to build Cusco,
and to build a great
Empire of the Sun.
One of the mysteries
of the Incas
is that the time period
of them is actually
very near to the conquest.
When the first
Inca, Manco Capac,
allegedly appeared on
the Island of the Sun,
the year only about 1100 AD.
In the next 400 years, suddenly
the great Inca Empire appeared,
and many archaeologists say
that Cusco and Sacsaywaman,
Ollantaytambo, Machu
Picchu, and other areas
were all built during
this period of time.
But there's a mystery
here, because all
around Lake Titicaca are
pre-Inca such as Tiahuanaco.
These buildings were
megalithic in scope.
They had keystone cuts.
They were giant granite
buildings and pyramids.
We know they were pre-Inca.
Is it possible that some
of the buildings that
are attributed to the Incas
are actually pre-Inca?
Like Tiahuanaco?
We're going to investigate
that and find the answers.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
Here in this sunken
temple there is supposedly
all the different
races of mankind.
Each one is different.
No two are alike.
And many of them
are wearing turbans,
as the giant
statues that we see.
Bolivian archaeologists
have actually reconstructed
this whole temple.
They call it The Sunken Temple.
That's a Curious,
unusual head right there.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Yeah, here at this main
temple here to Tiahuanaco,
Bolivian archaeologists
have actually
re-erected most of these
walls that you see.
They were just blocks
that were lying around.
But look at these
giant stones here.
They were already sitting here.
Notice how incredibly
worn they are.
They certainly weren't
originally quarried
and cut this way.
They would have
been square blocks,
but the weathering on
them is so incredible.
I mean, it's as if they've been
exposed for thousands of years
even, and possibly
some of this weathering
must have been wave
action possibly
from the shore of
Lake Titicaca washing
across these giant
blocks for hundreds,
if not thousands, of years.
This block here is
an original standing
where it's always stood.
In fact, originally
Tiahuanaco just
existed of these
giant slabs of stone.
Look up at this one here
how it's notched up here.
Other giant stones would
have been fitted to this.
These walls might have
been twice as high
as they are now, originally.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the backside
of the Ponce
Monolith, one of the most
famous statues at Tiahuanaco.
Look at the top.
He's wearing a turban.
He appears to have braided
hair coming down his back.
This is also how
Etruscans wore their hair.
He has hieroglyphs
and a Viracocha sun
god carved on his back.
The trousers he's wearing
has different hieroglyphs
and symbols on it.
And then he's wearing some
kind of jewelry on his ankles,
but he's, in fact, barefooted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is another of the unusual
monolith statues at Tiahuanaco.
Notice the goggle eyes.
He also has tears coming down.
Some say he's crying for the
Red Land or for Atlantis.
He's wearing a turban.
He's holding two odd devices in
his hands, possibly some kind
of jade scepters,
showing his authority.
Once again, he has what
we say is two left hands.
His right hand is
in a position that's
completely unnatural and
impossible to actually have.
This is thought to be a
kind of Egyptian-type motif.
He's wearing a belt that
seems to have crabs on it.
And then his pants also
have these unusual symbols
or hieroglyphs on them.
He also has some kind
of chain around his feet
and he's barefooted.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So here's your standard keystone
cuts here at Tiahuanaco.
You see the T cuts
here, and there's
one on the corresponding side.
You see more here.
You always have two
corresponding keystone cuts
on each side.
And in fact, this is exactly
what we see at Ollantaytambo.
This is also a pre-Inca
kind of construction.
We know that
Tiahuanaco was built
at least a thousand
years, if not more,
before the Incas existed.
In many ways,
these keystone cuts
are proof that
the Incas were not
building Ollantaytambo
or the other buildings
that we've seen around Cusco.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the famous Gate of
the Sun here at Tiahuanaco.
You can see how this
megalithic piece of andesite
has been split by an earthquake.
In fact, this gate isn't really
from this part of Tiahuanaco.
This gate is from the
Pumapunku section Tiahuanaco,
which is several
kilometers over that way.
If you look up here, you can
see the Sun god, Viracocha.
He's holding two
staffs on either side.
These may have been jade
scepters of authority.
Notice too, that he has
tears coming down his cheeks.
He seems to be crying.
These are sometimes called
The Tears of the Sun.
Gold is often called
The Tears of the Sun
here in South America.
This is something
of an indication
that Tiahuanaco was a
massive metallurgical plant
processing ores and creating
gold, silver, and copper.
Some people say too
that Viracocha's crying
for the Red Land, for Atlantis.
The land that's been destroyed
and no longer exists.
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the backside
of the famous Gate
of the Sun at Tiahuanaco.
And if you look at
this, it's quite clear
that it's been articulated to
be part of other giant walls.
The line on this right
side is coming down,
but then it curves in and then
comes straight down again.
It would have had another giant
wall fitted up against it.
And in fact, we know that this
is not the original position
at The Gate of the Sun was in.
And even how it got to where it
is is something of a mystery.
[GUITAR MUSIC PLAYING]
This is the famous
Gate of the Moon.
It's on the east
side of Tiahuanaco.
Smaller than the
Gate of the Sun.
It may well have also
come from Pumapunku,
which is several kilometers
here to our west.
Notice the large lichen patches.
It does have some patterns and
hieroglyphics in the center.
It's carved out of one solid
piece of andesite granite.
Nicely articulated, although
it's been heavily weathered.
Creating a door out of
completely solid rock like this
is extremely
difficult, and it makes
you wonder why they would
even want to do that.
Be much easier just to have
two pillars and then a lintel
across.
But the builders of
Tiahuanaco actually
wanted doors that were
completely made out
of one piece of solid rock.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In this part of
Pumapunku at Tiahuanaco,
we have what's called
the typical trenching
by archaeologists.
What they've uncovered here
is like a sluice, actually.
Probably for water.
Part of this whole
water complex that
was all over Tiahuanaco
and Pumapunku.
And on these blocks here, we
see the very clear keystone
cuts that we were talking
about at Ollantaytambo
and other places.
Here we see exactly how they
are used with a keystone cut
on either side of the block.
And then liquid metal is
poured into these cuts
here, forming a clamp.
This is a very unusual way of
fitting large stones together,
and we see it all
over the world.
In Egypt, in ancient
Turkey, in ancient Greece.
We see it at
Ollantaytambo in Peru,
and we see it here at
Tiahuanaco in Bolivia.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Here on the east
side of Pumapunku,
we see how this
whole structure's
been destroyed by
some giant tidal wave
from Lake Titicaca or something.
Massive blocks of
sandstone and granite
are just sitting
exactly as they fell.
We have several
feet of mud and muck
from the tidal wave
from Lake Titicaca that
apparently destroyed
this building
and filled up the blocks with
mud and stone here that we see.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So here we can see how the
water conduits where originally
fabricated here at Tiahuanaco.
They were covered like this
with another piece of granite.
Water poured through
these conduits.
And what's a fascinating
aspect here at Tiahuanaco
that this was like a water city.
Water was pouring everywhere--
out of the walls, it
was coming underground.
The whole city today is--
even we can see it during
these new excavations--
had tremendous amounts of water
flowing throughout the city.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Right now we are looking around
Tiahuanaco and the Pumapunku
section for a stone
that will satisfy Chris
that there was really
ancient machining here
in South America.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
>>952.
There.
OK.
All right, we have
the same dimensions--
a similar dimension here.
So the cutter or the
tool passed along
this surface cutting
this step here,
and then another one
cut this surface.
Now, the interesting
thing is that we
have a very sharp corner here,
which is extremely difficult
to do, especially in stone.
You don't do this
with little balls.
It just doesn't happen.
And a toothpick
and a grain of sand
isn't going to work either.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
If we were to consider a more
simple way of making this,
such as using dolerite pounders
or using sand and wood,
or sand and stone, we
would not find the features
that we find on this thing.
And basically what we
have are rough surfaces.
And to create the
kind of precision
that we have on the
stone would mean
that a person would
have to lap the stone
and continue to
lap it and lap it
and lab it, which
would take away
a lot of the surface
irregularities
that we see on the stone.
What I see indicates to me that
this was cut with a machine,
and the tool just plowed
through the material.
And it didn't need
to be polished,
but it is certainly
very precise.
Well, I've taken measurements
between the holes
to the edge of the stone to
see what the distance is.
And I've taken a measurement
between each hole
where I've been able to-
some areas have been broken.
I've been unable to measure.
But essentially it's running
between 2.605 two 2.616.
So considering that I'm really
measuring the start of a groove
to an edge that is
kind of broke in a way,
that's within
ten-thousandths of an inch.
I should imagine
that statistically
that would be perfectly
straight with that edge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As you can see,
the surface on this
is absolutely incredibly,
incredibly precise.
David, come here.
>>What have you found?
>>OK, I think we've
found something here.
I think we've found
something that
speaks of a high technology.
This stone has all
the characteristics
of being machined.
>>You think in ancient times,
with what we would call
modern machining techniques.
>>Yeah.
Yeah, I think we've found
the holy grail here.
What this indicates to
me is that this piece
was put on a machine.
It was planed on one side.
And using this surface
as a reference,
this groove was cut at a precise
dimension from this surface.
There is no way that this groove
could have been created just
by chiseling it out, or
even rubbing it out using
a piece of bone or sand.
It's impossible to do that and
achieve the characteristics
that we have,
because what we would
find, if this was done by
hand and painstakingly slow
using bone and sand, you would
find a very smooth surface
on the inside of the groove.
But we don't find
a smooth surface
on the inside of the groove.
It's almost like a
tool went through that
and just plowed
through the material.
And the variations
that we see are
natural to any
manufacturing process.
>>So are you also saying that
to create a block like this
you would have to have
electricity and, you know,
metal tools with diamond
saws and things like that?
>>Yes.
What I think, David,
we have to remember
that this is a
civilization that suffered
a tremendous cataclysm.
The whole culture was
totally wiped out.
And everything that supported
the infrastructure, that
supported the building of
this, disappeared long ago.
It could be, actually, under our
feet over there or over there.
We don't know.
But it's obvious that
this particular site
has been covered over by
huge mudslides, an uplift
of the plates of the earth,
a tremendous cataclysm that
destroyed the civilisation
that created this.
>>OK.
Now, in your
opinion, do you think
that the same civilization that
was creating what we see here
at Tiahuanaco also made what we
saw at Ollantaytambo in Peru?
>>I strongly believe that, yes.
>>So you would say then
that Ollantaytambo was not
built by the Incas, but was
built by the same people who
built Tiahuanaco?
>>If not the same people, they
possessed the same technology.
[FLUTE MUSIC PLAYING]
>>How were these megalithic
balls in Costa Rica built
and what were they for?
What was the purpose
of the pyramids?
How were the megalithic walls
of the Andes constructed?
Join me, David
Hatcher Childress,
as we go around the
world in search of lost
cities and ancient mysteries.
[THEME MUSIC]